---
title: About Me
---

Hi, my name is Radon Rosborough (they/them). I am a software engineer
on the Infrastructure team at [Plaid](https://plaid.com/) in San
Francisco, CA, graduated in Spring 2020 from [Harvey Mudd
College](https://www.hmc.edu/) majoring in computer science. My
hometown is Boulder, CO.

When I'm not studying or working, I often enjoy building tools to
improve my programming workflow, and in particular I am an
[Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) junkie. I am frequently
frustrated by the software I use, and seem to have a supernatural
ability to uncover bugs and unintended behavior in every sort of
application. Because of this, I value *fixability* and
*understandability* very highly (don't pretend it doesn't have bugs;
instead, make it as easy as possible to recover from them), and this
philosophy strongly influences the design of the software I create. I
abandoned [Apple](https://www.apple.com/) a few years back due to
irreconcilable philosophical differences, and have never looked back.
I run [Pop!\_OS](https://pop.system76.com/) and
[Ubuntu](https://ubuntu.com/) on the [System 76 Oryx
Pro](https://system76.com/laptops/oryx) and [Framework Laptop
13](https://frame.work/products/laptop-diy-13-gen-intel) and
[GrapheneOS](https://grapheneos.org/) on the [Google Pixel
6a](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pixel_6a). Over time, I am working
towards replacing or deprecating all products and services provided by
unethical technology companies, including but not limited to Amazon,
Apple, Facebook, Google, and Microsoft.

I spent time on a regular basis maintaining my open-source projects
[on GitHub](https://github.com/raxod502), because I enjoy helping my
software help other people and because I want to set a positive
example for open-source community-building. If you file a bug report,
I may not have time to fix the problem, but I *do* read every single
one and always respond. And of course pull requests are always
appreciated.

In my free time, I enjoy reading (typically science-fiction and
fantasy; my favorite author is [Brandon
Sanderson](https://www.brandonsanderson.com/)), playing video games
(typically indie titles with well-polished aesthetics and tight
gameplay; favorites include [Celeste](http://www.celestegame.com/) and
[Hyper Light
Drifter](https://www.heartmachine.com/hyper-light-drifter)), and going
on walks (hey, I wasn't able to stick to any other kind of exercise
routine).
